---
layout: post
title: "C++ Interview Note"
description: ""
category: tech
tags: c++ interview
modify: 2022-12-19 12:09:00
---

# Intro

This is a note for my c++ SWE interview.


# Questions I came accross

## How does C++ implement polymorphism?

[My notion note (chinese)](https://epigone707.notion.site/c-a832ed5df8a14fd080f4f3bb3150ca0b?pvs=4)

## New features in C++11?
[My notion note (chinese)](https://epigone707.notion.site/c-a832ed5df8a14fd080f4f3bb3150ca0b?pvs=4)

## How to stop people deriving from my class?

source: [Bjarne Stroustrup's FAQ](https://www.stroustrup.com/bs_faq2.html#no-derivation)

First, why do you want to? There are two common answers:

- for efficiency: to avoid my function calls being virtual
- for safety: to ensure that my class is not used as a base class (for example, to be sure that I can copy objects without fear of slicing)

According to Stroustrup, 
> the efficiency reason is usually misplaced fear. In C++, virtual function calls are so fast that their real-world use for a class designed with virtual functions does not to produce measurable run-time overheads compared to alternative solutions using ordinary function calls. Note that the virtual function call mechanism is typically used only when calling through a pointer or a reference. When calling a function directly for a named object, the virtual function class overhead is easily optimized away.

Ok, now how to stop people deriving from my class? In C++11, the solution is the [final](https://en.cppreference.com/w/cpp/language/final) specifier.
```c++
struct Base {
    virtual void f();
};

struct Derived final : Base {  // now Derived is final; you cannot derive from it
    void f() override;
};

struct DD : Derived {  // error: a 'final' class type cannot be used as a base class
                       // ...
};
```

Sounds easy. However, in my interview, the interviewer didn't allow me to use `final`. Thanks to Stroustrup, I now know the answer. For older compilers, you can use a clumsy technique:

```c++
class Usable;

class Usable_lock {
    friend class Usable;

   private:
    Usable_lock() {}
    Usable_lock(const Usable_lock&) {}
};

class Usable : public virtual Usable_lock {
    // ...
   public:
    Usable();
    Usable(char*);
    // ...
};

Usable a;

class DD : public Usable {};  // ok, but...

DD dd;  // error: DD::DD() cannot access
        // Usable_lock::Usable_lock(): private  member
```


## Virtual in C++

### Virtual Function / Runtime polymorphism

source: [Geeksforgeeks: Virtual Function in C++](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/virtual-function-cpp/)
- A virtual function is a member function which is declared within a base class and is re-defined (overridden) by a derived class.
- If we have created a virtual function in the base class and it is being overridden in the derived class, then we don’t need virtual keyword in the derived class.  e.g. `derived::print()` is automatically considered as a virtual function.
- **When you refer to a derived class object using a pointer or a reference to the base class**, you can call a virtual function for that object and execute the derived class’s version of the function. This is called runtime polymorphism.

Basic example:
```c++
// code adapted from https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/cpp-polymorphism/
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

class base {
   public:
    virtual void print() { cout << "print base class" << endl; }

    void show() { cout << "show base class" << endl; }
};

class derived : public base {
   public:
    // print () is already virtual function in
    // derived class, we could also declared as
    // virtual void print () explicitly
    void print() { cout << "print derived class" << endl; }

    void show() { cout << "show derived class" << endl; }
};

int main() {
    base *bptr;
    derived d;
    bptr = &d;

    // Virtual function, binded at
    // runtime (Runtime polymorphism)
    // output: print derived class
    bptr->print();

    // Non-virtual function, binded
    // at compile time
    // output: show base class
    bptr->show();

    return 0;
}
```

### Virtual Inheritance / Virtual Base Class
source: [wiki: Virtual inheritance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Virtual_inheritance), [Geeksforgeeks: Virtual base class](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/virtual-base-class-in-c/)

Virtual inheritance is a C++ technique that ensures only one copy of a base class's member variables are inherited by grandchild derived classes.

Consider the situation where we have one class A .This class A is inherited by two other classes B and C. Both B and C are inherited by class D. This is called [diamond problem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiple_inheritance#The_diamond_problem).
```
  A  
 / \  
B   C  
 \ /  
  D 
```

Now let's try to implement this graph without using `virtual`.
{% highlight c++ linenos %}
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

class A {
   private:
    string _msg;

   public:
    A(std::string x) : _msg(x) {
        cout << "A constructor\n";
    }
    void show() {
        cout << "show " << _msg << "\n";
    }
};

class B : public A {
   public:
    B(std::string x) : A("b") {
        cout << "B constructor\n";
    }
};

class C : public A {
   public:
    C(std::string x) : A("c") {
        cout << "C constructor\n";
    }
};

class D : public B, public C {
   public:
    D(std::string x) : B("d_b"), C("d_c") {
        cout << "D constructor\n";
    }
};

int main() {
    D d_object("useless");  // output: A constructor
                            //         B constructor
                            //         A constructor
                            //         C constructor
                            //         D constructor

    // d_object.show();  // compile error: "D::show" is ambiguous

    // A& a = d_object;  // compile error: base class "A" is ambiguous

    // solution 1: use compile time cast
    A& Aref_cast_from_D_to_B = static_cast<B&>(d_object);
    Aref_cast_from_D_to_B.show();  // output: show b
    A& Aref_cast_from_D_to_C = static_cast<C&>(d_object);
    Aref_cast_from_D_to_C.show();  // output: show c

    // solution 2: use scope resolution
    d_object.B::show();  // access B's A, output: show b
    d_object.C::show();  // access C's A, output: show c
}
{% endhighlight %}


We got error in line 45 and 47. The reason is that, a `D` will contain two copies of `A`'s member variables: one via `B`, and one via `C`. These two copies could be accessible by using [static cast](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/static_cast-in-c-type-casting-operators/) or [scope resolution](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scope_resolution_operator)).

To sum up, when any data or function member of class A is accessed by an object of class D, ambiguity arises.

Now, let's see how we use `virtual` specifier to avoid ambiguity.
{% highlight c++ linenos %}
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

class A {
   private:
    string _msg;

   public:
    A(std::string x) : _msg(x) {
        cout << "A constructor\n";
    }
    void show() {
        cout << "show " << _msg << "\n";
    }
};

class B : virtual public A {  // virtually inherits A. B becomes virtual base class.
   public:
    B(std::string x) : A("b") {
        cout << "B constructor\n";
    }
};

class C : virtual public A {  // virtually inherits A. C becomes virtual base class.
   public:
    C(std::string x) : A("c") {
        cout << "C constructor\n";
    }
};

class D : public B, public C {
   public:
    D(std::string x) : A("d_a"), B("d_b"), C("d_c") {  // need to call A's constructor
        cout << "D constructor\n";
    }
};

int main() {
    D d_object("useless");  // output: A constructor
                            //         B constructor
                            //         C constructor
                            //         D constructor

    d_object.show();  // output: show d_a

    A& a = d_object;  // good

    // use compile time cast
    A& Aref_cast_from_D_to_B = static_cast<B&>(d_object);
    Aref_cast_from_D_to_B.show();  // output: show d_a
    A& Aref_cast_from_D_to_C = static_cast<C&>(d_object);
    Aref_cast_from_D_to_C.show();  // output: show d_a

    // use scope resolution
    d_object.B::show();  // output: show d_a
    d_object.C::show();  // output: show d_a
}
{% endhighlight %}
Now, a `D` has only one, shared `A` instance in its representation, so there's no ambiguity anymore.

### Virtual Destructor
source: [geeksforgeeks: Virtual Destructor](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/virtual-destructor/)

Deleting a derived class object using a pointer of base class type that has a non-virtual destructor results in **undefined** behavior.

To solve this problem, the base class should be defined with a virtual destructor.

{% highlight c++ linenos %}
#include <iostream>

using namespace std;

class base {
   public:
    base() { cout << "Constructing base\n"; }
    virtual ~base() { cout << "Destructing base\n"; } // virtual!
};

class derived : public base {
   public:
    derived() { cout << "Constructing derived\n"; }
    virtual ~derived() { cout << "Destructing derived\n"; } // the virtual specifier here isn't necessary
};

int main() {
    derived *d = new derived();  // output: Constructing base
                                 //         Constructing derived
    base *b = d;
    delete b;  // output: Destructing derived
               //         Destructing base
    return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}
According to Scott Meyers' [Effective C++](https://www.amazon.com/dp/0201924889):
- Always declare destructors virtual in polymorphic base classes.
- If a class has any virtual function, it should have a virtual destructor.
- Classes not designed to be base classes or not designed to be used polymorphically should not declare virtual destructors.

